Hello everyone, I'm Rudy
Fraser and it brings me a lot of joy to be presenting
on this topic here at the second atmosphere conference.
It's been really cool to be able to ask people if
this is their first atmosphere conference and if this is your first
atmosphere conference, welcome.
And yeah, I hope that there's something here that you can
take away and ship something and build something for the community and
ecosystem.
So as I said, I'm Rudy Fraser.
I'm the founder and CEO of Black Sky Algorithms.
I am previously a fellow at the Applied Social Media Lab
at the Berkman Klein Center.
I'm the board chair of PAC Collective, which is a
nonprofit that fiscally hosts about 25 mutual aid groups in
New York City.
And I'm an organizer with We the People NYC.
Black Sky launched about three years ago now.
And we started off as just a custom feed on the Blue
Sky app.
And now has been used by over 2 million people.
The feeds are used by a quarter million people every month.
And we are a member supported organization.
And that member support is really important because the last time that
I was here at Atmosphere conference, it was just me
on this slide.
But now it's our entire team.
And our entire team is here today.
So if you see folks with a Black Sky shirt
on, tell them what's up.
Yeah.
And I think that the thesis for Black Sky is that we
really do believe that App Protocol has these unique properties that allow
folks to -- it helped us bootstrap a pretty large community.
And we think that we're really interested in helping other folks
basically do the same thing, leveraging the stuff in the protocol.
Okay.
So the title of this talk is Groundings with my siblings.
And I want to start by explaining where that comes from.
Walter Rodney was a Guyanese activist, scholar, Pan-Af
ricanist.
And I think most important for us today, he was a practitioner.
He's best known for how Europe underdeveloped Africa.
But his earlier work, The Groundings with my brothers, is one
that changed how I think about what I'm doing with Black
Sky.
Rodney was 26 years old, fresh off his PhD teaching at
the University of the West Indies in Jamaica in 1968.
And he did something that the university and the Jamaican government
could not understand.
He left the campus.
He went into the communities and sat down with Rastaf
arians.
People that -- and I think a lot of people have an understanding
of like Rastafarians in like Bob Marley's
sense, but Rastafarians in Jamaica are considered like -- they
're like houseless people.
They're like the -- they're like gutter punks.
Like they're outcasts.
And yeah.
And so he sat down with these folks and they reasoned
together.
And that's what grounding is.
It's a Rastafari concept, sitting down together to
reason.
And the part that I keep coming back to is that Rod
ney insisted that he was the student in those exchanges.
He said, "I got knowledge from them, real knowledge." He went in
thinking he had something to teach, and he came out understanding that
the people closest to the problem already had the analysis.
They didn't -- they just didn't have the platform that he
had.
His widow, Patricia, described grounding not as an event, but as a
practice, a way of living.
One where academics and activism were integrated and inseparable.
I'm borrowing this framework because over the last year, I feel
like I left the code base and went to -- kind of did
the inverse -- went to college campuses, went to conferences, went to community
spaces, sat down with people, spoke, listened, probably talked to the most
people I've spoken to in my life in the last year.
And like Rodney, I learned more from those conversations than than
I could have given back in those moments.
And so that's what this talk is about.
It's like what I heard, what surprised me, what we got
wrong, and kind of, yeah, what we took away from these moments.
So here's what that grounding looked like in practice: 15 different
cities, several college campuses and schools, a lot of times sitting with
people who have never heard of App Protocol, never heard of Blue
Sky, but who cared deeply about the same problems that I believe
everyone in this room is building towards.
And now I'm grounding with you.
Really, I should be probably sitting amongst y'all, right?
Like it's instead of just like speaking from the from the
podium.
But I want to give you what Rodney gave the people
he sat with, which is just honesty and his experience.
There's a tendency in tech circles and communities to only share
the wins, only share the big fundraisers, and I think
if you follow me on Blue Sky, Black Sky, I tell you
when I think we're doing something wrong.
And yeah, and so I don't think you learn from just
wins or highlight reels.
I think you learn from losses and from pain.
The open source community is at least adjacent to the ideal that
information wants to be free.
And so this is my giving this information to you for free
so that you can build something that folks find valuable and you
don't have to go through the same pain points that we
had.
Okay.
First up, PDSs.
I think portability is a core premise of the protocol.
But there's a pattern in how it actually becomes real for
people.
So in this chart, you can see, so over time, right, this
is a chart pulled from Makuba.
I think it's their name.
They have this dashboard of independent weekly users posting from non-Blue
Sky PDSs.
And that first gray circle there was -- I kind of unintentionally
posted about giving away invite codes.
I was talking about giving away invite codes to our mods, and
then Black Sky was like, there are invite codes?
What are the invite codes for?
And so, and so, yeah, so I did the like Oprah meme
and then we got like 200 replies asking for invite codes.
And at the time, I remember being pretty frustrated with where the
atmosphere community was at on data portability.
I feel like there are times when stuff is like treated as
a solved problem.
And so, I made a post about it.
And a day later, I made a video showing how to migrate
using the GOAT command line tool.
That video now has 1,000 views on YouTube of just like
a 45-minute video where I'm just like, this is hard.
You probably don't want to do this.
And then the very next day, Bailey Townsend shipped version
1 of PDS Mover.
And yeah, and so and
like you can kind of clearly see that that makes that makes
a difference, right?
The purple circle is some band controversies that we won't
get too, too deep into.
But, you know, it was, again, a real pain point.
I think sometimes people see things on the internet and they think
it's like, it maybe doesn't affect real life.
But again, I'm in all these different places.
I was at a conference in the Bay Area, this like observ
atory.
And multiple times in the night, people kept coming up to me
is like, so what's going on with Link?
I'm just like, do you know him personally?
But they just heard about the story.
And for us, it was very painful.
It brought our entire mission, like sometimes people like, why do you
even need a PDS?
It brought our whole mission into question of like, why do you
even exist then if this could happen?
And so it was and it had a real dollar value to
it.
Like we ended up shelling out $14,000 to like
set up an app view server just to like bare metal.
And then went and that's not counting the labor to like
get all that stuff built and shipped.
And then the blue circle, which is the big spike, is Euros
ky launching.
Shout out to them.
So you can see all this happened at the end of last
year.
And there were just like very specific things people did to change
the narrative.
And as I mentioned to Blue Sky folks, like with all due
respect to Blue Sky, like this was a fully community driven effort.
There was no like outside initiative.
It was just folks saw a problem.
They worked on it.
I know Bailey was like going back and forth with folks figuring
out how to make it better.
We were going back and forth.
I was every invite code was done via my DMs at
one point.
So I was literally talking to hundreds of people to like coordinate
this.
And so the pattern there is the story is really just like
there was a tool, but it wasn't accessible to folks, right?
The command line tools didn't move the needle.
And then it went to this client side Chromium based
tool that was mobile friendly.
And that was what folks needed.
And yeah.
And so it was just like, to me that felt very clear.
The users that we knew, like they weren't ever going to
like download the source code and like build something to use it.
You know, it needed to be really clear and concise.
And we found out from just doing that, like there are people
using all types of browsers I've never heard of, personally.
And in different scenarios.
So imagine you got some -- one of our first users who migrated,
it was like a half a gigabyte blob storage.
Imagine if you're trying to do that client side over like
a cell phone network with some random browser.
You know what I mean?
And so -- and yeah.
And so -- and then what I think I tilt -- I tip my
hat to the Eurosky folks.
What they did was they did it server side.
And so it was like it just happened in the background for
the user.
And it became really turnkey.
And so we took that inspiration from that and built what became
move.
blacksky.
community which followed that same pattern.
Also, because we have this community space, we're able to like
analyze the -- this 20 million record feed database and was able to
find like the real -- people had real fear.
They had -- they thought that their accounts were going to get deleted
if they did the migration process.
And so like another thing that we did was like add social
proof.
So like when you go to move.
blacksky.
community now, you see how many people are on the PD
S.
You see -- and it's sorted by people with big followers because
people are like, oh, if I have a bigger account, how will
this work for me?
So having that kind of social proof.
But the -- but we found that that was the effective way to
help people get through the migration.
And yeah, now our PDS has over 30,000 accounts on
it.
All right.
The next one.
A favorite.
The app.
bski compatible app view.
I want to -- this is like an important one for me because
I think sometimes people point out, I guess, where we're at
and not necessarily where we want to be going.
Blacksky is not trying to be a micro blogging app.
We're not trying to like compete with like blue sky on
that.
The app modality or medium is not important for us.
But to fulfill the mission of reaching millions of people, but being
independent, we needed to do this.
We needed to be able to say that we could do a
backfill of the entire network.
It needed to be possible.
People have said it was done.
We need to like actually do it.
And more than anything for me, I need to prove to myself
this could be done in a way that people would actively use
it.
That I would be able to log in, open it up every
day, and like it would be an effective experience for me.
And it was hard.
And the things that I knew were going to be frustrating for
people were the things that ended up being frustrating.
Some people like to act on the internet that like follower counts
don't matter.
The biggest complaint is the follower counts.
Not matching blue sky.
To the point where we built a feature that says backfill
and progress that analyzes what our count says compared to what
blue skies says compared to what microcosm says.
And if it's a big enough difference, then we show that
badge to people.
To try to get ahead of that and like communicate that they
're this, we're working on it.
Right?
Profile pictures not loading.
People are like, I can't recognize it.
I don't know this person by their handle.
I know them by their profile picture.
Right?
So like, if you don't have the profile loading, now it
's like a weird experience when you're scrolling your timeline.
Stuff like that matters a lot.
Another thing that we found out that I don't think blue
sky knew themselves is that if you're banned from blue sky,
you aren't banned from the image CDN.
So your profile picture can load.
But you are banned from the video CDN.
So you can't upload videos.
And so now we're like, oh, we got an app view.
Boom.
We unbanned you.
Like, we reversed the decision.
And then they tried to upload a video.
But we're still using their video CDN.
And now, once again, we look like we haven't fulfilled our
mission.
And it's important to know these things.
I have on the kind of, just like, I think what people
think it's like setting up an app view.
I just want to highlight some of that stuff.
They think the top is just, like, record hydration.
Then it's like, there's 42 million people, but we don
't care about all of them.
So, like, what's the order that you backfilled the people
's accounts?
Then there was, like, stuff was taking too long.
And then people wanted to use Skeets app with our app
view.
And then Skeets app had, like, a timeout on it.
So that was, like, shorter than our timeout.
So then it was a bunch of 502 errors if you
tried to use Skeets.
Notifications is its own thing.
There was a bug at one point where it was giving you
duplicate notifications.
That's annoying.
Post aggregation, profile aggregation, those are the file accounts.
Handle resolution.
Being able to, like, include the germ DM.
Get timeline.
The further down is, like, the harder the thing's got.
And so get timeline.
Like, your following feed is, like, really hard.
Mod appeals.
So if Blue Sky bans them and they're, like, we
got -- people were reaching out to us, like, which one of you
banned us?
It's a very tricky and complicated thing to answer.
And then get back to people about, like, you know, and again,
every single time something like this happens, it's, like, if you
can't -- if -- like, why do you exist if we're still,
you know, experiencing these things?
OAuth.
You found out that OAuth doesn't allow you -- if you
do a social app fork, you're used to being able to,
like, delete your account, deactivate your account.
We included OAuth to make it, like, really easy for anyone,
like, even if they're not on our PDS, to be
able to log into Black Sky.
But then you couldn't -- the OAuth permissions don't allow
you to delete your account.
And so then we're, like -- then we had to, like, hack
on PDS Gatekeeper to, like, do some things where, like,
now we ask you -- if you're on our PDS, we
ask you for the password.
And that allows you to delete the account.
And if you're not, we send you to the account management
page.
But we know that there -- the account management page also, like, doesn
't have, like, all the things that you need.
Right?
So pain.
All this is pain.
And, again, you, like -- you learn from the pain.
But we experience the pain.
So now if you want to do this, you know it's
kind of coming.
Right?
That's the whole message of this.
Post-Nerd at Proto.
So something
that I -- yeah, I keep coming back to is, like, and I
actually got this from Marissa from our team, is, like, this
concept of, like, the job to be done.
When I'm speaking to people, it's not to do at
Proto advocacy.
Like, someone took their time out of their day to hear if
I can solve the pain point for them.
I'm not going to pitch you on, you know, like -- I
'm not going to pitch you on the cause.
I'm supposed to pitch you on, like, I can actually fix
this thing that you're experiencing.
So if you -- you know, a lot of the a lot of
the app protocol devs are the community.
We're talking about record hydration.
We're talking about Postgres optimizations.
You've gotten -- those conversations are very far away from what the
user is experiencing.
Unless your user is a developer, which they could be.
But for us, we're trying to onboard communities of storytell
ers who are not sold on decentralized social media.
They're sold on community building as a tool.
And then we said that this protocol allows us to get the
things that you want out of it.
And yeah, so I spoke to many groups -- many groups like this,
along with AJ from Northwestern.
We spoke with Movement for Black Lives.
We spoke with Slow Factory.
These are people who, like, they're activist organizations, community builders with
millions of followers on other platforms.
They've had people on their teams who've, like, built -- they
're, like, VPs of engineering at, like, social media companies.
So they understand social media.
They understand decentralized social media to a degree.
Very Aligned couldn't close those deals people.
For various different reasons.
There were -- and there were -- there were young folks at our South
by Southwest talk who came to learn how decentralized social media can
be a part of their content creator journey.
And if you -- and this -- which was, like, a little weird for
me because it's, like, you're in college and I think
maybe do something else.
But -- And then I got to imagine how disappointing it was for
you to, like, want to be get -- you want to get lit
on the internet.
And then you -- we were talking to you about podcasting and
RSS.
You know.
But, you know, we can't write -- we can't write people
off.
If we want this stuff to grow, right?
Like, another -- I posted about this one example.
Like, there's a media organization.
They wanted to reach a particular audience.
They wanted to reach black Chicagoans.
We did not lose this deal because the complexity of that protocol.
That wasn't, like, hard to explain to people.
We didn't lose it because they were, like, oh, Mast
odon exists.
That's not why we lost it.
We -- we lost it because they had a specific need.
They wanted to reach black Chicagoans.
It's a decentralized network.
We don't have all that information.
You know.
It's disparate.
You may be on our PDS.
But, like, maybe some of you are on a PDS.
Other people are on other PDSs.
You're on the feed.
Maybe you're doing -- using a different client app.
All these different things.
It makes it hard.
Like, even if -- even if we kind of knew these people existed,
there wouldn't be a way to, like, do the same -- because
they were able to then go to Facebook.
And Facebook's, like, give us $20,000.
We'll get you in front of a million people in the
next year.
Can't promise that to people.
And, yeah.
And we've only -- we've only ever done inbound.
We think that some things that maybe -- we have some, like, theories
that if we build out this project called Black Sky Cash, it
will make the pitch more compelling to people.
It'll make a clear monetization strategy.
So maybe even if some things aren't necessarily all the way
there yet, it's like, oh, here's, like, a way that
you can build community, do democratic governance, and have a way for
you to fund things.
But the job to be done is never use AppProto.
Right?
The job to be done is solve the problem that I have.
And now -- and this one's very important.
Because we're pitching community builders, we are pitching the atmosphere in
these spaces.
Like, I'm not pitching Black Sky, necessarily.
I'm pitching everyone's projects that are here.
I know, like, I sometimes talk kind of crazy on the internet.
But I am a lot of people's cheerleaders -- cheer
leader.
I can't do all the things that y'all have done.
But I do tend to get people to open up about their
problems.
And when they do, I pitch your products.
An example is, like, at South by Southwest, Karen Atia, who
was fired from the Washington Post because of a post on Blue
Sky about Charlie Kirk.
We were talking and she was like, you know, I wish there
was a way to go live and stream for my Blue Sky
account.
And I was like, there is.
Have you heard of StreamPlace?
I was like, it's another app.
And she's like, well, why is it another app?
And so we've had this pitch of, like, you have -- you
know, there's the whole login with Blue Sky, login with app
protocol.
That's even like a second step.
It's just like, why do I have to go to another
place if you're saying that I can use this same thing?
Right?
So to me, this is like a tension in the atmosphere right
now.
You can log into a dozen different apps with a single identity.
That's great to us.
But to everyday people, being told, use this app for microblog
ging, use this one for live streaming, use this one for long
form content, it doesn't create delight.
It feels like what they already have, a bunch of apps.
And there's no even way to discover all the apps.
There's not an app store for app protocol.
So the -- there's no aha moment there for people.
Like, we have the aha moment.
We look at the firehose.
We look at your repository.
We know that all this data is on one account.
The user is just like, okay, this is another -- this is another
skin of a thing.
Right?
So for me, what would be compelling, and I think to the
people that I've been talking to, is something like an app
protocol browser, an app protocol app store.
Something that turns log in with your identity across many apps from
developer premise, or a premise, to a user experience.
So that's the question mark there.
It's like, I think we talk about app protocol, as like,
the protocol.
And we use the comparison to the web.
Had debates about that even just in this trip.
And I'm like, so what is the -- well, the web has
Firefox.
And I can go to any website with Firefox.
And it feels really simple, intuitive.
Right?
There's no universal app protocol client.
If you had to download -- the equivalent is like downloading an app
on your phone.
But then again, now we're just back to downloading a bunch
of apps on your phone.
And if you have logged in with Google, then like, as a
user, I'm like, what's the difference?
All right.
Finally, there is a book by Douglas Hofstadter called I
'm a Strange Loop.
Oh, recognition.
Nice.
Of yourself perceiving the world.
And that model changes what you perceive, which changes the model.
So when we started using moderation, we used Blue Skies O
zone.
It's open source.
It works.
But it wasn't built for us.
Right?
It was built for Blue Skies Trust and Safety Team.
Our moderation team, it started out as like very community moderation.
And we still want that to be that way.
We're even building more ways that the community can participate in
moderation.
It's more like Ozone was built for a particular worldview,
not necessarily a scale.
Because we can do peer moderation at scale.
Reddit does peer moderation at scale.
It's just a different opinion of how things work.
And so for us, Dr.
K, JD, they're community members.
They weren't reviewing content for a platform.
They were protecting a space that they're a part of.
And so Rishi on the team built Acorn.
And literally...
And as I understand it, because Rishi is very
interested in co-working with people, because we're all remote right
now.
He and JD got on calls every day and just worked side
by side.
And when JD ran into a problem, Rishi built something for
it.
And so, yeah.
And so what you're looking at on the screen is like
the first thing a moderator sees when they open a session.
Not a queue, a check-in.
How are you feeling right now?
Do you have water nearby?
You can step away.
Your well-being comes first.
There are session goals.
It could be time-based or item-based.
So moderators choose how much weight they can take on.
Because you could just loop, right?
And just keep going.
And that could be really, really heavy.
We're building collaboration tools in it.
We're building ways for us to govern our community from it.
We're going to build ways to issue badges to our community
through it.
Where we use...
Our feed kind of works like a subreddit.
So Acorn is going to be built to like manage a
subreddit where you can remove members.
You can remove posts.
You could do this from your phone.
Our mods...
Our mods want to moderate from their mobile devices.
And yeah.
Ozone doesn't...
It just doesn't work like that.
It makes it really difficult to.
And again, that's not a...
That's not just because it's some big platform, some billion-
person platform.
It's just us.
We built it the way our users, our community, our mods do
things.
And so that's the strange loop.
Like, you are the user.
You're also the builder.
And the thing you build changes your user experience, which changes what
you build next.
Toni Morrison said, if the book you want to read doesn't
exist, you have to write it.
But it's deeper than that.
So once you write it, now it's out in the world.
Now it's coming back to you.
Right?
So the gift and the recipient keep changing each other.
So every lesson today comes from the same place.
We are the user.
Right?
I was the first one to migrate to the Black Sky PD
S.
I also had the pain when it was just GOAT.
Right?
I knew the app you had to work because...
Like, the way that the community would expect it.
I knew follower counts had to be right.
Like, the first app view that I used that was independent from
Blue Sky.
It was like, half my followers now.
This is weird.
So you just...
You can predict these things.
Right?
And I know we have to...
We have to get beyond just the dev community.
Right?
Like, if we want it to be a big thing, like, it
has to be fun.
It has to be cool.
It has to have different...
It has to have that delight.
Right?
It has to have these aha moments.
And so, yeah.
So that's the kind of thing.
We became...
We become who we build for.
And that's not, like, a bug.
That's, like, the whole point.
And that's our practice of how we work on things.
Thank you.